From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
one 52 recorded live Thursday,
February 26, 2009. Support for
Hanselman. This is provided by
tolerant Reb controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications. online@wwwdotterikdotcomandby.net developers journal the
world's leading.net developer magazine online
at www dot  dot
com. In this episode, Scott
dog's cogeneration with Kathleen dollar.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman,
and this is another episode
of Hansel minutes. I'm sitting
here at the Rocky mountain
trifecta. What I like to
call the Denver code camp
in Denver, Colorado. I'm sitting
down with Kathleen dollar chief
technologist at app venture. Thanks
for sitting down with me.
Well, thanks for inviting me
Back in the day. Many,
many years ago, 50, 60
years ago, in 2003, you
wrote the book on cogeneration
and.net. I did. There were
not a lot of dotnet
people doing cogeneration, although it's
an old concept. It is,
it's a very old concept
and I've looked at it
for a long time before
then, but in.net, we had
the right tools to get
started with it and do
it in a much more
profound way than we could
with previous tools that I
had been involved in. And
so I got involved with
it. I was writing my
own harnesses, my own tools,
and I wound up writing
a book to come out
of that. And it was
a long time ago and
it feels like a long
time ago, 2003 in the.net
space is kind of a
long time ago. Yeah. And
that's when I released it.
So it was actually, it
was most of 2002 was
that, that was what I
did. Yeah. So we, as
a community that don't know
community is not, is not
mature in a number of
ways, but we are, I
feel like 2009 may be
the year that we kind
of reached some level of
maturity in a number of
different aspects of software. And
hopefully cogeneration will be one
of them, but how are
you doing Cogan back in
the day and.net, The couple
of kind of standard problems
that we have to solve
when we're doing cogeneration. And
they actually hit a couple
of different areas of development.
And I just want to,
there's one thing I kind
like to say as a
starting point is that what
we're trying to do is
make the coding better, the
coding process better. And I
want to use the word
better instead of faster, it
will be faster. That's a
good thing. The quality will
be better. That's a good
thing. Programmers will be happy.
That's a good thing. All
of that, a good thing.
But sometimes you also have
to sit back and say,
it doesn't mean my project
is going to go X
percent faster because it doesn't,
it doesn't save you time
in requirements. It doesn't save
you time. And a lot
of other features that are,
that are actually a big
part of your job, they're
getting lost. Cause as you
shrink the coding down, all
of a sudden those become
bigger. They're more evident you
once that gets pulled down,
but we can talk about
some of those areas, but
I know you've got experience
in cogeneration as well. Yeah.
I worked for a number
of years as a chief
architect of a company called
Kirlian now called CheckFree. And
we did online banking and
along with some of my
compadres and partners in crime,
like Patrick Caldwell and a number
of other guys, we did
some Cogan, 2003, 2004. We
were using COVID Smith at
the time and we generated
maybe 30, 40% of our
application, but it was largely
domain objects. We had a
very domain driven design. So
we weren't making, we weren't
using co-generation from a rules
generation perspective. We were making
purely data transfer objects, but
lots of them. And that's
the kind of code when
I said your coders will
be happier. That's the kind
of coder that that's a
kind of code that makes
coders crazy to write. And
so it's, it's really important
to recognize that we're, we're
trying to get coders focused
on where coders need to
be focused. We're not trying
to, to, to make code
and go away. It's just
that we're spending time on
stupidity. What we want to
do is spend time on
really good domain issues. We
will solve more problems. We
will be able to write
applications. We can't get to
you right now cause we're
still rewriting the mission critical
applications. We started writing back
in the fifties. Exactly the
kind of code that we
were generating was, was monkey
code. It was just a
bunch of monkeys. And this
is not to say that
my compadres were monkeys, but
it was a monkey slapping
on a keyboard, could write
this stuff. It was properties
and validation and getters and
setters. But the thing that
was interesting was that requirements
would change subtly. And then
you go and say, Oh,
I got to change these
400 domain objects so that
they all have this behavior.
Some of those behaviors can
be expressed in an object
hierarchy, but other ones couldn't.
Then we turned to cogeneration
because it was so repetitive.
That's actually, you've touched on
something that's really important there.
And that's the fact that
the longterm ability to evolve
and flex a cogeneration application
is really one of the
fundamental benefits. If we were
to say, you know, we're
gonna make a bullet list
of the really big ones.
That's really it. Because either
on an architectural level, somebody
new comes in and says,
this was stupid. Why did
somebody do that? Well, you
have to yank that out
of there and you have
200, 300, 400 classes that
are involved or something changes
in the domain. A business
change happens. And remember, these
are an entirely separate timelines.
So it could be that
one is happening faster or
slower. We just don't know
what's going to change. So
on the business timeline, we
need a new field. We
need a new table. We
need some new change there
and we can quickly roll
that out and quickly roll
it into the application. So
the ability to manage change
and evolve through time is
really one of the huge
benefits of generate applications. My
goal is nothing less than
applications that lasts for 20
years. We're not even close
to that right now, but
I do believe that that
is the, that is the,
the, the, the brass ring
where we should be reaching
for is being able to
establish metadata, metadata driven applications,
as much as possible limiting
the actual code that humans
have to write to something
we can find, and then
we can rewrite it. It's
okay. Technology changes and then
allowing technology to change through
our generator architectures. That's the
dream. Now your book is
probably a little dated now,
but because we were using
XSLT for a lot of
your cogeneration, but there were
some principles. And since we've
had uncle Bob on talking
about principles, they were five
principles of cogeneration that you
talked about that might not
be dated. There were, there
were five. And actually when
I first put them out,
I was a little bit
nervous because the Java community
in 2003 had a lot
more experienced than we did.
So put it out in
a cogeneration.net and as the
job that people, what they
thought, and they agreed with
me, which made me very
happy because the book was
already impressed. It would have
been a bit rough if
I had had totally like
that went up, but they
are, they're still valid. And
so we can go through
those. So the first one
is cogeneration has to be
under your control, your control,
being the organization, or the
individual. All of these, I
think have more nuances now
than I put on in
2003. And one of the
nuances on that is actually
organizations need to have kind
of a hierarchy in some
cases of how generation is
done, but that's sort of
a separate, you can't go
out and buy this. You,
you have to be involved
in the architecture yourself. And
the reason is that when
there's a problem, somebody's going
to come to you. So
that's the first one. The
second one is that metadata
is discreet and more verbal.
And actually metadata is a
sub genre all on its
own. So I could talk
for a very long time
about it, but it's ultimately
the model it's ultimately how
you describe what you're going
to build. We think of
models in terms of only
our business object models, so
that, that domain model, and
that's very important, but actually
the layout of our UI
is also a model or
rules, engines for validation. These
are also models. These are
all ways that we describe
at a higher level of
abstraction. What we actually want
to build. We have to
be able to get at
that work with it. It
can't be buried away. It
has to be more verbal
and changeable from one technology
to another, from one source,
like a database. So it
needs to be agnostic to
the, to the end, right
Agnostic. We have a long
way to go on metadata.
It's probably the richest area
for growth that we've got.
The third one is it
has to be an easy
process. I used to say
it has to be click.
Let's see one click click.
Once Mike, I was like
the reverse of Microsoft. Now
I said, pretty much has
to be no click. It
should be part of the
normal continuous integration build process.
It's an evolution of the
same concept We had had.
We were doing continuous integration
back in the day. And
we always said, build dot
test dot bat, right@thebeginningofbuildupthatwehadtokindofgenerate.bet. And
we had not made it
one click, but to your
point, getting it into the
continuous integration, it is as
fundamental as doing the bill.
Absolutely, absolutely. The reason is
you want to find your
problems very quickly. It's the
same reason you do continuous
integration on any other part
of your application. So that's
the third one. The fourth
one is that handcrafted code
is sacred and protected. And
I use a very strong
word for a good reason
and that's that whether it
was done by a mistake,
and I really want to
underline that it doesn't matter
if somebody blew it and
made a mistake, something done
by human beings should be
protected. Human beings are created
by nature. Creativity means if
you come back after lunch,
you may not be able
to do it the same
way you have to protect
it. There are very good
to protect it. That's an
area that we have the
technology everybody's just been ignoring
it for the last six
years. So basically the one,
one way to address that,
that's a very simple and
can be done in code
Smith. It can be done
in T4. It can be
done in any generation language
that I know of. It
just takes effort is to
include in the file, a
check, some of the file.
And so you can simply,
you will, you can know
absolutely that that file was
unchanged later. And I've been
doing that since 2000. That's
really interesting. We had a
big problem early on because
early on and again, I
feel silly to think that
five years ago was a
long time, but people would
open up, you know, food
dot CSS and they'd start
editing it. And then they'd
be upset when the continuous
integration server blew it away
or generate up at, blew
it away. So then we
started calling them, you know,
food dot G dot CS
or food generated dot CS.
And we put giant warning
messages in, in comments at
the top, which they would
then promptly erase and then
start writing code Visual studio
begs you to make that
mistake. If you believe that
making comments will help you
not generate overwrite generate code.
I really encourage you to
ensure that that comment is
every 20 lines of code,
because we do not open
files at the top and
start reading them at the
top. We get around. Yeah.
And there's nothing wrong with
generating comments every 20 lines
or so You really believe
that just what we need
is visual studio to recognize
them. They will not do
it as generated. I'm building
the checksum, but the editor
into 2010 should make it
easier for us to do
it. So you're saying, and
I don't know if this
is controversial or not, but
you're saying that if somebody
breaks the rules, bus opens
some generated code, you'd rather
have a warning or break
the bill or something then
to lose, have them lose
their little bit of human
generated bits. Absolutely. That's a
bill break. You break your
build and you're actually could
break it. And it kind
of a warning level perhaps,
cause you don't really know
how deep that went into
the system, but your process
is broken just like it
would be if anything else
went wrong. So you absolutely
should break the build at
that point. How many? Four.
Okay. And so number five
is kind of self evident,
but it is that generated
code should be an equal
or better quality than non
generated code. And it's really,
we have opportunities and we
should take advantage of them
once we go to generate
a code. So there was
two small caveats that also
got added. One of which
I totally blew in my
work. I'm trying to make
amends, which is, it should
be simple. People that have
ever looked at my work
would laugh right now. And
the other one is that
it should pay back on
the first project. And so
those are kind of just
asides that, that have kind
of gotten added into the
picture, the, the payback on
the first project, we go
so fast now, I don't
think anyone would seriously consider
making an investment that took
them three projects to make
it back that you, but
that's real. We have to
be agile in cogeneration. It's
my belief that they make
a good fit. You know,
and it's interesting. This is
a little bit of a,
of a side, a side
trip, but a lot of
the people in the, not
just the.net community, but in
the, in the overall software
community tend to be consultants.
The loudest ones are consultants.
So this means the blog
that you read is not
always a guy who, a
guy or gal who's suffering
for 10 years on an
it system. I always talk
about this canonical character. I
call him the chief architect
and the Nebraska department of
forestry. Okay. He's usually not
blogging. He's trying to do
actual work, right? That the
people that we, that you,
the listener listened to may
be doing short term consulting
projects. They may be coming
in. It's a little off
color, but I usually call
it sex without the commitment.
It's the one night stand
of software. They leave, who's
going to raise this baby.
Who's going to put this
child through college. I did
this for for six years.
I would fly in. I
would whiteboard for money. I
would, you know, a great
white hope, hello, and I
would leave. But a lot
of those early, early systems
in the, in the mid
nineties that I was working
on weren't as flexible and,
and long, long Lee hadn't
that didn't have longevity that
they should have had. And
I think that we need
to remember that when we're
listening to loud bloggers, consultants,
speakers, whoever. And I think
that absolutely, you know, I
mean, when was the last
time you were on a
five year long project? I
actually do maintain long commitments
with some of my clients.
I do have with some
of my clients, not all
of my clients, because I
do training in cogeneration. And
when I do that, it
often is a good luck.
Call me if you need
me. And sometimes I don't
maintain those relationships, but it
is important that all of
us maintain that vision. And
it's not just cogeneration. Cogeneration
is one piece of the
puzzle. We it's a matter
of writing code that is
going to evolve. We are
taking it as a matter.
We are accepting it as
a matter of course, that
technology would change so much
that we're just going to
have to rewrite in five
years anyway. So why worry
about the five year timeframe?
And that is just, it's,
it's an unacceptable longterm strategy.
It is, it is true
in the short term, but
it's unacceptable. And I think
that cogeneration is, is an
opportunity, but it's not an
opportunity to be sloppy. No.
And some people use it
as, Oh, it's Hey, it's
generated code. Doesn't have to
be pretty. Yeah. I've said
that I've seen, I've definitely
seen systems like that. And,
and it's, there's some areas
you can actually be sloppy
in, for example, if you're
wasting your time adjusting white
space, I think you're absolutely
just doing that with time,
but because you can, because
you can pretty print it
later, but in terms of
actually writing true good quality
code is very important. Now
there's a number of ways
these days in.net and visual
studio to generate code, there's
lots of products to use.
But one of the things
that's been getting a lot
of press lately is, is
T4. This new newly found
newly discovered, but it's been
a while and been around
for a long time, three,
four years, things hidden in
visual studio. That's right. It
used to be called T3.
I don't know which T
is new, but I, I,
this is like a test.
It's a text templating transformation.
Took it toolkit. Yes. Yeah.
And so they added another
T and it is an
acronym, but it's an acronym
when they go to the
next version, I'm kind of
hoping they don't find another
tea and make it to
five, but who knows what
they'll do? Yes. It's on,
it's on your listeners machines.
If they're running 2008 and
most people have no idea
that they have a cogeneration
language on their machine right
here. Right now, This is
not something that they had
to when they install visual
studio. If you're listening and
you're on 2008, you have
this right now, right? You
do. Except I said, Except
there's a couple of big
accepts on this. It's it's
not altogether clear to me
what the strategy within Microsoft
that they got it into
visual studio is, but they
gave it to you without
a, a little icon. You
can't go in and just
say, create a new item,
T4 template. Okay. You can't
do that. So that's missing
an editor is missing. There's
no editing capabilities within.net, then
visual studio itself. And they
didn't give you a harness.
And we can kind of
come back and talk about
harnesses because the other two
are pretty self evident. The
first one is easy. You
create a text file. It
changed the extension. If you
want to see up, put
within visual studio. So if
you want visual studio to
turn around and display, when
you, when you say view
this, you're going to actually
be able to see output.
And the way it actually
appears is it's a sub
item. The way that Like
designers, you have like the
whatever. And then you have
the dot designer. Don't say
it. If you give it
the extension dot T T
then visual studio where create
a sub, a sub file
is a dot CSR dot
VB file, which contains the
output. It has some limitations,
primarily the way data parameters
are passed in. So that
can be somewhat, it may
or may not be useful.
It's very useful to learn
T for you can also
give it another extension that
you simply know later we
use T4. And that's, that's
just an extension. I don't
want visual studio to do
that because it's only going
to get confused when that
template starts trying to evaluate
parameters, which I can tell
you about some of the
problems about that related to
the harness. So you can
solve that problem. You can
make visual studio do generation
for you today. Right now
you'll be doing it. And
editor that looks like notepad.
If you just use visual
studio and hopefully within the,
we have an answer now,
and hopefully we'll have another
one in the 2010 timeframe.
Hi, this is Scott coming
at you from another place
in time. Are you looking
for an object, relational mapping
tool for mission critical projects
using lincoln.net. I wanted to
share with you genome. So
specifically designed for developing dot
and enterprise applications. Genome is
a mature link, integrated ORM
tool. It's been employed in
numerous large scale projects. Over
the last six years, genome
was created for the.net platform
as opposed to being a
port from Java. And it's
thrived on platform innovation since.net.
1.0 genome has supported links
since its CTP release. In
may of 2006. It offers
several unique features, such as
encapsulation and reuse of linked
queries and expressions. You can
really fully harness the power
of link while benefiting from
your database platforms. Unique features,
compose complex link queries, decompose
the query logic and your
domain model link supports all
the major database platforms you
find in enterprise environments like
SQL server, but also Oracle
and IBM DB too. And
find out more about how
genome integrates tightly with visual
studio and what tools do
you know offers to reduce
development time@tinyurl.com slash try genome
G N O M E,
where you can also download
a free and fully functional
trial version. I hope you
enjoy it. So now in
2008, I say file new
text file. I call it
food.tt. I had a couple
of lines and people can
search the web and find,
teach for tutorials. It'll tell
you the directive that you
need to put up the
name of the output file
and they can start writing
what looks like ASP code.
Okay. Well, yes and no.
What they write as just
raw raw text is going
to is just going to
be printed out as it
is. There's different types of
directives, different types of, of
elements you can put in
there. Many of which drop
you into getting expressions. One
of which direction to getting
expression, one of which drops
you into the code that
you want the language written
in, which can be either
VB or C-sharp could probably
be other stuff, But it's
text. You could generate CSV
files or XML or whatever
makes you happy. Absolutely. So
we have a language within
the template. It's one of
the things that takes a
minute to get used to
there's a language within the
template that runs the template.
For example, you want to
do something for every property
in your business object, you
have a loop and that
loop is logic and code
within the template that runs
the template. Then the template
is going to output something
that could be VB or
C-sharp code. It could be
a configuration file. It could
be XAML. It could be
any thing that is a
text file that you want
to get put out onto
your office. And they hit
control shift B, and it
happens. That thing gets generated.
Now that happens in visual
studio. I understand that it
doesn't happen at ms. Build
level. There's some EMIS build
tasks you need to build
in to make sure that
happens at the command line.
Yeah. And I'm afraid I'm
not that familiar with the
EMIS build stuff on, on
that, because T4 is sort
of a, it's all just
coming together for us right
now. I actually use an
external harness myself. And that's
something I want to talk
a little bit about, but
before we go there, we
mentioned editor and we did
mention the solution for people.
There's a company called Claris
and you'll have the, the
URL on the, the notes
for the, And Clarius is
CLA R I U S.
And one of the, one
of the primaries over there
is a buddy of mine
named Daniel . Everyone calls
him kazoo, KZ you. So
if you search for KZ,
U and T for, or
search around for T for
you, we'll inevitably bump into
these guys. They're all over.
Yes. T for editor, I
believe Google searching for T
for editor will get you
right there. And they have
a community edition. I'd really
like to thank the folks
for Claris for doing that
for you, because I'd hate
for everybody to have to
invest a hundred dollars, but
you know what, if you're
doing this all the time,
I think you should seriously
consider going ahead and getting
the full copy. But in
terms of just getting started,
now, you don't need that
there is a community group.
So this gives you what
IntelliSense and syntax highlighting and
all this stuff that you
don't get in visual studio.
Right? And there's more in
there. There's more of that
in the version. That's a
hundred dollars, which is a
very reasonable price. Sure. But
in the, in the coloring
is tremendously important because as
I said, you have two
languages going on at once.
The one that you're outputting,
the one you're writing your
template, and if they're the
same color. Good. Yeah. I,
we did that in notepad
back in the day. And
it was always challenging because
just as when you were
making webpages, you're thinking about
the HTML you're producing. And
then you're thinking about the
inline script. If the inline
script happens to be the
same language as what you're
generating, if you're using VB
to generate VB or vice
versa, it can be very,
very eye blurring as to
what's happening. Coloration is tremendously
important in that coloration pretty
much solves that problem. So
you said a harness, why
do I need a harness?
Okay. So a hardest is
basically something that's going to
run the template and T4,
as it stands right now,
it doesn't take parameters. It's,
it's rather, it's rather primitive
in its relationship with the
rest of the world. And
that's because there's a model
within DSL, which is where
T4 came out of D
T Microsoft. Didn't sit back
and say, we want to
build a, a templating engine.
What they sat back and
said is we want to
build DSL and you cannot
do this. Yes, thank you.
D domain specific languages. And
to support that we must
do generation. So within the
domain specific language world, there
are space for interacting with
the T for templates. And
so, because of that, it's
a little bit awkward. One
of the, the harnesses that
is the first prototype is
available right now, but I'll
be putting up in the
next week a much more
sophisticated version at the, at,
at venture.com. We have a
community edition, which is free.
We're putting it up there
so people can get used
to . And what that's
going to let you do
is actually manage properties, being
handed into your T four
template. You create a dictionary.
The dictionary gets handed off
to this engine. The engine
does the work to get
that data into the template.
So getting properties passed is
one of the things you
need a harness to do.
You need harnesses to manage
errors. You need harnesses to
manage crossing some sort of
an innumerable. So there's other
ways to solve this problem.
It's been documented how to
go within T four and
have a T for file,
create many, many different files
from itself. But I find
that to be sort of
confusing and the wrong tool
to do the job. So
what, what the hardest is
I've been working with for
years, I've been writing harnesses
for, for many years, I've
written a couple of them,
and this is the best
one by far. I'm really
happy with it. But what
this one will let you
do is it will loop
across a collection. So for
example, if you're describing your
business model is going to
loop across your objects so
that you're going to be
able to do something and
create a new file across
each object. These are the
kinds of problems that harness
is required. So to put
that into a more concrete,
if I could, if I
could pause for a second
that you, if you have
a co-generation template, perhaps you're
going to loop over some
database tables or a custom
domain specific language that you
have created doing, doing some
domain driven design, maybe a
text file, or a custom
DSL that you've written, you're
going to want to spin
through those and then spit
out actual concrete classes. Like
for example, in linked to
SQL, there's a designer, a
visual designer that the DME
DBML file. And you say,
you say build, and then
a giant epically sized dot
designer file pops out, right.
You know, megabyte plus if
dot CS code And your
readers can't see the face
I just made because I
hate that one file per
problem approach. I really want
a one file per entity
approach because that's or whatever
it is, you're creating an
entity in the formal sense
there, but that's the way
we write code and we're
possible generated code should look
like Exactly. And this all
depends on how you decide
to structure your T4 templates.
But what you were saying
earlier was that by default
he floor Defour kind of
has a one template, one
fi one resulting file, one
generated file technique. And there
are ways to, to expand
that. For example, Damien garde
has released a T for
open source template. That is
basically a wholesale replacement for
the link to SQL generation
stuff. He generates a one
entity profile, but he does
it with  and some
tricks he's got to basically
allow T four to fan
out. And you're saying that
you're not a huge fan
of that because it speaks
to how the template itself
is structured. It, it does,
it's really gets back to
the single responsibility principle. So
what we're doing right there
in what Damien's doing, and
I take my hat off
to Damien, and I'm really
happy that those techniques are
out there. We love Damien
big switches to Damien, but,
but, but I don't want
a template whose job it
is to produce code, to
also be managing files. Yes.
That doesn't work for me.
And that's why the harness
that I've written steps back
from that it has an
output service and the output
service manages, how are we
going to get it? It's
got file naming services and
asset services. So all that
stuff is pluggable. And for
me, we have to step
back into.net to make those
things happen. We're not gonna
do it today. So putting
words in your mouth, are
you saying that your harness
is acting as like a
T four cogeneration pipeline? It's
rather than just a simple
transformation from a bunch of
inputs, some output, and this
magic super controller template does
all the work you've made
a, a pipeline with pluggable
units at every point. That's
absolutely true. It's absolutely true.
Every, every point I, I,
I could think of it.
I, I put that in
and it will be an
open source thing. So I'm
hoping we're going to get
more suggestions for other ways
to make it pluggable. The
key things that after eight
years in this, I know
we need plugable are going
to be naming services because
people are all over the
map and what they need
in that file out put
services, because there's many techniques,
there's ways to protect code.
There's other things to check
some that I mentioned earlier,
and then the templates themselves,
I don't know what templates
somebody else is going to
want to write, and they're
going to need to interact
with metadata. So they're going
to need to interact with
some sort of a model.
I don't know what that
model is going to look
like. And for me to
prescribe any interface for any
piece, anywhere in that system
is not the right way
to manage the problem. So
what I've done instead is
you've met no, no. You've
had Glenn block on to
talk about I'm a meth
user. He's my meth dealer.
You know, you know, all
that kind of dealers, my
meth dealer. So it's a
really good example of, of
where math can really shine
because it allows everybody to
be a consumer or provider.
And so the whole relationship
among templates and metadata and
services that they require, all
I'm doing is hooking that
up and showing people enough
that they get the idea.
But then they, my hope
is people would just go
to town on it. And
that's why, you know, this
is a appropriate community release
for us because it's a,
it's a tool for people
to take and go forward
with. You know, obviously we
love what we're doing internally,
but that's really separate from
us wanting to see the
world doing a lot more
cogeneration. Now, one of the
things that, that I, as
someone who did cogeneration for
years would say, they're kind
of the two biggest problems
are on the right side
of the problem, deciding what
I'm going to generate. And
then on the left side
of the problem, deciding from
what I am going to
generate it from, and is
the thing on the left
side that, that, that metadata
simpler to write than the
thing that I just want
to get. You just did
a beautiful job of explaining
why this is hard. People
want cogeneration to be easy.
What they want to do
is they want to say,
give me the tool. I'll
pay money for it. Do
whatever. Give me the tool
that just makes my application
happen. And the problem is
architecture is still hard. Metadata
is still hard. These problems
are still hard. They will
be for awhile. And you've
got to be involved with
that, or you're selling your
soul to whoever's giving you
your architect. Well, that's why
tools that look at the
database and just generate everything
from the database are so
popular. That's right. And, and
we go both directions on
that. We also have tools
that are domain and create
the middle and go left
and right, exactly. But, but
the part in the middle
of the mapping, I do
it and it, I would
now call it a D
DSL, except it's all XML.
I've been doing that for
eight years. It's in my
book. How to, how to
do that mapping. It's been
there for a very long
time. We now don't like
doing an X amount. Now
we do it in DSL,
but it's the same problem
of how do we say
this business object represents these
columns from these joint objects
sitting out in that database
over there and how do
we make that definition? So
those are all problems that
are, are really core. The
motivated problem. I think we'll
solve in the next three
or four years. I'm really
optimistic the architecture problem. I'm
not an architect. I mean,
I do architecture. I copy
other people's architectures, but I'm
not one who has enough
experience to say, yes, there
is that perfect architecture. We
will all be able to
use. Now this might come
out of left field, but
while here, while we're here
talking about things that I
find very, you know, fairly
concrete and fairly, at least
within the realm of understanding
for me, there's this thing
looming. There's this Oslo that's
out there that a lot
of people are still trying
to get their heads around.
And I'm seeing, it's almost
like blind men trying to
tuck describe an elephant, you
know, and you feel, Oh,
this feels like a snake.
And that feels like a
tree, but we're feeling different
parts of the elephant. And
no, one's really seeing the
big picture. At least not
people, unless they've dived, dove
full, full on into Oslo.
You're describing these DSLs, are
they solving this problem as
well? And how's T4 going
to fit into that. I
don't exactly how everything is
going to fit together at
the end of the day.
I think that I still
have a lot to learn
on that. I'm very excited
about all this load because
to me, what all is
low is a wonderful, big,
beautiful repository for metadata gives
us some opportunities for consistency
across metadata. It gives us
some opportunities for rules gives
us some options, some really
exciting opportunities there, from my
perspective, it's enough because I
can do the rest. It's
easy. Once we do that,
architecture is still hard, but
the actual physical act of
generation, we've known how to
do for awhile. So if
they do it right, and
I'm happy with it, that's
even better. But if they
just give me the tools
to create really good metadata,
then that is, is tremendously
powerful. And one of the
nice things, at least in
some spaces they're accepting and
workflows one that they're doing
this the need for both
textual and visual representations. And
hopefully that's going to, you
know, be really pervasive throughout
Oslo. Now, if people are
going to sit down right
now and, and, and learn
about a cogeneration, where do
they start? I mean, there's
the tools, there's the act
of turning the crank and
doing that. But there's, there's
the concepts. There's the architecture.
There's the big stuff. Are,
are there other tools that
are lying out there that
I should be using? Is,
is there only T4? I
know that there's, there's COVID
Smith, but what else can
I use to generate code?
And where do I start?
There's a couple, there's a
couple out there and there's
a couple of third party
tools, which I'll just skip
over only cause the third
party right now. And, and
I don't wanna say anything
bad or good about them.
They're there. You can go,
you can go search for
them and, and find them.
Microsoft has another one though,
that nobody knows about. Or
very few people know Microsoft
shill, aren't you, you don't
even work for them. Okay.
Well, you know, it's just,
There's lots of tools out
there. There's LLB L Jen,
there's a gosh, what are
those?  yeah. Miguel Castro's
pre-code breeze. Yeah. There's a
ton of them out there,
which is why I hesitate
to say any. Cause I
know I just left out
three. I know I looked
at my generation. I know
I'll sit here and just
thinking of the ones I
left off. And so everybody,
I forgot. I'm really sorry.
Microsoft's other one is actually
in VB NAI. And there,
this has been written about,
I actually did not. I
wish I'd discovered this on
my own. Cause it made
me feel very smart. I
first saw this from Beth
who heard it from somebody
else that messy. So this
has been out there and
I've actually done quite a
bit of work on this
because from this, I was
actually able to create templates
that were a single template
that could generate either C
sharp or VB code without
the code dump. Now I'm
not sure that that work
is actually has a future,
but that's work. I did
about a year ago, Stop
because you're talking really fast
and you're using a lot
of terms that not everyone
will understand. One of the
things that we used to
do when we were generating
code was you would create
a thing called a code
Dom and a code. Don
was a language agnostic way
to express instructions. It was
almost like building an XML
document using only Dom instructions.
It was just as up
to except we were building
method calls and property getter
centers and descriptions of classes
using a bunch of Lego
pieces that were object. The
best thing to say about
the code Dom is to
stay as far away from
it. It was to yeah.
To call it Baroque would
be an understatement. Yes, but
it did allow you to
do it in a language
agnostic way and spit out
either C-sharp or VB T4
is text to text. So
you have to make a
declaration to yourself about what
you're going to generate. Coloration
that you make, you make
tea, you can make two
declarations in T for about
the prefix. You put on
the output file and on
the language of the template
itself. But by nature of
writing the code, you are
saying whether it's VB or
C-sharp you're putting in imports
are using and all the
other. So back to what
you were saying, the scandalous
bit of information that you're
telling me that there's a
co-generation tool inside of visual
basic nine. Okay. So as
a reformed VB or C
I'm cause nothing, nothing worse
than a reformed. I, cause
I was VB. That was
where I started out. I
did my C in high
school and high school and
college  then I became
a semi-colon person. And now
I get hassled by the
community when I don't give
their props, I cross code
in both languages. So I'm
actually giving talks right now
and cross coding. So yes.
Cool. But back to VB
nine in this, what we've
got is XML literals. And
if you code in any
language and do not understand
XML, literals and VB nine,
you are selling yourself short,
they'll learn about it. So
there's a very powerful language
for creating something. It's generally
XML, it's generally XML. And
in fact, you are initially
creating XML, but there is
a very important property called
dot value. What dot value
does is take all of
the inner XML and concatenates
it into a string you
have just created source code
or anything else Create what's
the XML around it for
just Because you have to
have it to make X
amount of sure. It's like
a co-generation hack. Like you're
declaring it. Is there a
sample I can go see,
I've got some stuff on
my blog. Beth Massey has
had stuff a while ago
on her blog. There's a
number of VB people that
are using this still price
has been working on an
article. And I really hope
that article is going to
be coming up in visual
studio magazine very soon. I'm
hoping that that I'm hoping
I'm not speaking out of
school to say that Billy
Hollis's has spoken about this.
A number of people have
been speaking about it. I
love Billy Hall's. Yeah, I
do it. I do it
more complicated than some other
folks do, but it's a
really powerful mechanism because you're
sitting in the heart of.net,
right? You have got every,
every possible tool. You can
make the deepest hierarchies. You
can use as much complexity
as you need. You can
call into subroutines, it's all
in all the intelligence, all
the, your you're in, in.net.
It's difficult to describe these
kinds of things. When you're
on a podcast, I've blogged
about this as well. You
can go to my blog
and click on the VB
category and I've shown about
if ever there were a
reason for a C sharp
person to get back involved
in VB or to even
do mixed language assemblies. It
is XML literals. It's the
kind of thing where the
purist might say, Oh my
God, what have we done?
We've built in one language
support, deep into another language.
But you know, once you
accept the existence of link,
a language within a language
or a at least a
query within a language, having
XML embedded in the language
seems to be, it's pretty
amazing. And I've, I've written
applications where I would have
a VB DLL just for
the, the generation of, of
XML. There's just really no
easier way in.net to generate
XML. And, you know, I,
I think it's kind of
cool. We talk about mixed
language DLLs, but I actually
like the current scenario. And
I like it because if
you're touching, if you're touching
XML, then you're touching a
schema. And if you're touching
a scheme of the ischemic
and change, put in a
different deal. So I think
there's a very good reason
for that boundary change and
the amount of actual VB
code that a C-sharp coder
has to write is pretty
small. The rest of it
is Really look like you're
right. It doesn't really look
like VP because you're really
focused on generating you're generating,
generating your XML. Or as
a lot of examples we've
been seeing lately with asp.net
MVC, there's been some examples
where we've had XML literals
generating XHTML. So VB XML,
literals as view engine, right,
as a, as a, as
a strongly typed way to
generate an entire webpage or
RSS feed or whatever makes
you happy. Right? But if
you just imagine putting inside
of those XML elements, putting
some inner texts, that was
what you wanted to appear
eventually. And it can be
nested in whatever pattern you
want, because it's simply concatenated
on a top to bottom
basis within the XML file.
Then you are able to
create any kind of output
that you want, whether it
was XML or not just
by putting that value at
the end. Right. Well, I
want to see this to
believe it. I want to
see if it's performing and
if it's something I'm going
to play with. So hopefully
we'll put it in the
show notes, a link to
some examples on your blog.
And some of the other
examples that we've talked about
today sounds good. Cool. Well,
thanks so much, Kathleen dollar
for sitting down and talking
with me today. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes. See you again next
week.